So we're going to be spending most of
the day on this website, learn.svelte.dev.
This is our interactive tutorial platform,
we've been working on it for
about a year, and
this week it is finally done.
I'm so excited to start
sharing this with people, and
recommending that people learn
Svelte on learn.svelte.dev.
There's a lot of fairly cutting edge
technology inside this website.
In fact, it is so cutting edge that
it does not run on Safari, just yet.
It will do, Safari 16.4 will add the
necessary API's for this website to work.
But for now, I recommend that you
open this website in Firefox or
Chrome, if you want to follow along.
So, quick orientation,
on the left we have the text that is
gonna walk us through each exercise.
We also have a menu up here,
if you open that you can see
all of the different parts.
Part 1 basics felt, part 2 advanced felt,
that's what we're gonna
be doing in this session.
And then in the next session when we cover
Sveltetkit, we'll cover parts 3 and 4.
On the right hand side,
we have a file tree.
In some exercises, you'll be able to edit
file names and add new files, but for
most of the time,
what you see is what you get.
To the right of that,
we have a code editor.
You can edit text in here, and
it will be reflected in the iframe below,
which is showing the output
of building this application.
You'll see that we have a little
reload icon above the iframe.
It is possible to get your application
into a broken state, in which case, just
hit the refresh button, and it will act
as though your browser had been reloaded.
You also have a URL bar to show where
we are in the app at the moment,
we have an open in new tab button
to the right of the URL bar.
And finally, we have a toggle for
the terminal.
Most of the time you won't need this but
in some of the later exercises,
particularly in SvelteKit,
it'll be useful to be able to see what's
happening inside your development server.
Finally, we have this grey solve button,
is greyed out on this
exercise because there's nothing
to do this is all just exposition.
But on the next exercise,
you'll see it turn orange, and
you will be tempted to press it,
I urge you to resist that temptation.
To learn this, it's better if you follow
the exercise and typing the code yourself.
You will still learn things if you
hit the solve button and cheat, but
you won't learn it as well.
It's kind of like the difference between,
walking around a city and
driving around the city.
If you walk if you do the effort yourself,
then you will develop a much richer mental
map and you will understand
the content a lot better.
So, consider the solve button
a last resort if you get stuck and
you feel like you're falling behind, you
can hit solve to see what the exercise is
supposed to look like, but try and
complete the exercise without doing that.
Okay, so what is Svelte?
Svelte is a tool for
building web applications.
It falls into the category of
user interface frameworks.
And UI frameworks, all essentially,
are involved in the task of making apps
easier to build by taking the code that
you would have to write to update
the DOM in a manual imperative fashion.
And allowing you to write it in
a declarative state-driven fashion.
This tends to result in much more
maintainable and understandable code.
So it allows you to build your app
declaratively out of components that
combine markups, styles, and behaviors
into a single atomic unit that you can
then compose together to
build something more complex.
So, it's similar to things like React and
Vue, if you've used frameworks like those,
but it has one key difference.
It leans into the idea that a compiler
can take the code that you wrote and
turn it into some other code.
So, Svelte is also a language.
It's a language that goes into
the compiler, and then JavaScript,
highly optimized vanilla JavaScript,
comes out the other side.
You can build your entire
application with Svelte,
you can use an application like spelt kit,
which we're going to talk about later.
Or you can add it incrementally to
an existing code base if you have one
of those.
And you can also build components and then
publish into NPM for other people to use.
Okay, this part we've covered,
so I'm going to skip to the end.
And we'll begin with our first component.
So as I explained in Svelte,
an application is composed of one or
more components.
Which is a reusable self contained block
of code that encapsulates HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript that belong together.
Ran into a .svelte file not a .js file,
we have our own file format,
because we're using our own language.
So, app.svelte on the right here,
this is a svelte component, and
this is the contents,
just an h1 hello world.
You'll notice that that is just HTML, and
that's an important fact about Svelte.
HTML is also valid Svelte.
So if you see some user interface on
a website that you're looking at,
you can go into DevTools, you can grab
that HTML, and the styles that affect it.
You can put it into a Svelte component,
and it will work.
Same deal if you see some HTML on Stack
Overflow, or CodePen, or a thing like
that, you can just drop it into your
Svelte component, and it will work.
Obviously, this isn't very interesting,
just having a static component like this
that doesn't do anything,
so let's add some data.
First, we will begin by adding
a script tag to the top of the file.
Now, if you're lazy like me, your first
instinct will be to say, well, okay,
I'm just gonna select that, and copy it.
And if you do, you will see that copy and
paste is actually disabled.
For the same reason that we discourage
you from pressing the solve button,
Wwe encourage you to type out the text
that is asking you to type out.
You will learn a lot better that way you
will develop the right muscle memory, and
you will notice things along the way.
So, I do encourage you as far
as possible to type the code out
although of course you can
disable it if you really need to.
So let's do that, let's add a script
tag to the toxic component.
And we'll add a variable, call it name,
give it a value of spelt.
And now, inside our component,
we can refer to that name just
by enclosing it in curly braces.
If you've used react,
this should be familiar,
this is basically the same as JSX.
Now, inside that expression,
we can use any JavaScript we like, so
we can, for example,
call to uppercase, like that.
And it goes from Hello Svelte E
to Hello SVELTE.
And we can do the same
with our attributes.
Same way that we can have
text inside components,
we can have dynamic
attributes in our elements.
This image is currently
missing a source attribute.
So, let's add one there, source equals,
this is Rick Roll everyone who's watching.
And this is all good, but
if you hover over this image,
you will notice something is wrong.
It's telling us that the image
should have an alt attribute.
This is because not everyone
can see those images.
In some cases,
because people have impaired vision.
it's because they have rubbish internet.
And they haven't downloaded the image yet.
So, it's very important that when
we're building web apps, we do so
in a way that is accessible to
the largest number of people.
Svelte will help you do that by telling
you when you make accessibility
mistakes like forgetting
to add an alt attribute.
So, let's add one to this element here.
It should be a description of what
is happening inside the image.
And you'll notice that when you add that,
that warning disappears,
the compiler is now happy.
And of course, we can,
if we want, make that dynamic.
The name is Rick.
Astley, and we'll replace that
in the alt attribute, like so.
Finally, one thing that
the Svelte does is,
it allows you to use shorthand attributes
when the name of the attribute and
the value of the attribute
happened to go inside.
So here you can see that source equals
source, well, that's duplicative.
So we can just replace that with source,
like that,
just a little quality of life enhancement.
Now, most of the time when you're
building a user interface,
you will need to add styles.
And in fact, the dirty secret
of UI development is that,
most of your code is probably gonna end up
being CSS, at least that's my experience.
I have some markup, and I have some
JavaScript, and I have a whole lot of CSS.
And so, JavaScript, sorry,
Svelte is not a JavaScript framework,
it is a web framework.
It allows you to keep your styles
alongside your components, and
you can write those into a style tag,
like so.
Let's add a p selector, that's gonna
target this paragraph, give it a color.
I'm gonna choose golden rod.
Gonna give it a font family of Comic Sans,
the greatest font.
Get that a full back for
the people who don't have, Comic Sans for
whatever reason, and we'll give it
a slightly bigger font size of 2M's.
And so, now ,we have some styles
that are attached to our component.
Now what's interesting about the styles
here is that they are scoped to this
component.
And what I mean by that is,
even though we've just used a P selector,
we haven't added a special class name,
or anything like that.
It won't affect any other
paragraphs on the page.
It will only affect the elements
inside this component.
And that's useful when we start having
multiple components on the page.
Because it would be impractical to put
your entire application in a single
component, obviously.
Instead, we can import
components from other files, and
we can include them in our markup.
So let's put a script tag
at the top of app.svelte.
And let's import this nested
component inside App.
All right, this is just like importing
any other JavaScript module,
default export is the component.
Once we've done that,
we can include that component inside app.
And so, again, you'll notice that even
though nested.svelte has a p element,
an app.svelte has a P selector, the styles
do not affect the nested component.
That's really good to maintainability.
So quick match to the bottom here,
components names, role is capitalized,
the distinguish them from HTML elements.
So any time you see something like this,
that is an HTML element, anytime you
see angle bracket followed by capital
letter, that is referring to a component.
Very often, you will need to inject
arbitrary HTML into your applications.
And right now, we have some HTML
in this variable string, but
it's just printing it out literally,
which isn't what we want in this case.
We can change that by using
the special HTML tag.
All we need to do is put this HTML
directive at the beginning of the tag,
like so.
And you'll now see that down here,
the strong element is
being rendered correctly.
There is a warning with this.
We are not sanitizing the HTML, you can
only do this with data that you trust.
You do not want to do this with data that
you got from a database unless you have
already sanitized it,
because that will open up your users
to cross-site scripting attacks.
And that is not a thing that we wanna do.